# Mara River in the Kenya and Tanzania case study
Python wrapper for running Mara River supplemental netica model (available [here](https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-22-957-2018-supplement)). **Note** that the Senqu river model currently will not run without a full netica license, due to containing more nodes than allowed by the free version. Mara River case study outlined in [this paper by O'Brien et al](https://hess.copernicus.org/articles/22/957/2018/hess-22-957-2018.pdf).

### Paper Abstract
Environmental flow (E-flow) frameworks advocate holistic, regional-scale, probabilistic E-flow assessments that consider flow and non-flow drivers of change in a socioecological context as best practice. Regional-scale ecological risk assessments of multiple stressors to social and ecological endpoints, which address ecosystem dynamism, have been undertaken internationally at different spatial scales using the relative-risk model since the mid-1990s. With the recent incorporation of Bayesian belief networks into the relative-risk model, a robust regional-scale ecological risk assessment approach is available that can contribute to achieving the best practice recommendations of E-flow frameworks. PROBFLO is a holistic E-flow assessment method that incorporates the relative-risk model and Bayesian belief networks (BN-RRM) into a transparent probabilistic modelling tool that addresses uncertainty explicitly. PROBFLO has been developed to evaluate the socio-ecological consequences of historical, current and future water resource use scenarios and generate E-flow requirements on regional spatial scales. The approach has been implemented in two regional-scale case studies in Africa where its flexibility and functionality has been demonstrated. In both case studies the evidence-based outcomes facilitated informed environmental management


## Requirements
- NeticaPy3: https://github.com/jataware/NeticaPy3
- pandas

## Usage
0. Download a copy of the Mara case study netica model from the supplimental material, and grab a copy of the mara netica file `O'Brien et al Mara Netica BN.neta`. For convenience, rename to `Mara.neta`
1. Set input variable beliefs with [input.json](input.json)
    - Variables may be set to either `'Zero'`, `'Low'`, `'Med'`, `'High'`, or `null`
    - `null` leaves the variable in its default state, representing a distribution over the probability of `'Zero'`, `'Low'`, `'Med'`, and `'High'`. For example, setting all variables to `null` runs the default configuration of the model without any interventions.
    - setting `'Zero'`, `'Low'`, `'Med'`, or `'High'` clamps the distribution to 100% for that field, and zero for all others
2. Run the program, specifying the path to the Netica file
    ```
    $ python mara_demo.py path/to/Mara.neta
    ```
3. Results are stored in `results/Mara.csv`

## Docker Usage

First build the container with:

```
docker build -t probflo .
```

Then run:

```
docker run --rm -v $PWD:/project probflo python mara.py neta/mara.neta
```

Results will be written to a `results` directory.

## Model Input Variable Explanations
Endpoint; BN model variable (BN Title) | Description | Rank
--- | --- | ---
Mara Case study: Toxicants pollution from anthropogenic activity, i.e. nutrients and toxic compounds, affecting BHN (TOXICITY_BHN) | In this EFA of the Mara Basin apart from sufficient water to meet the BHN of communities, if the quality of the water is unsuitable the endpoint may not be achievable. The threat of toxicity of the water has as a result been included in the assessment as a driving variable of the risk to BHN in the study. Small and large scale agriculture, untreated domestic wastewater discharge, untreated wastewater from industrial factories and wastewater from gold mines are sources of toxicant input in the MRB. Toxicant input may in turn threaten human health if contaminated water and/or fish are consumed. The measure selected to represent this variable is the type and percentage cover of agriculture, urban areas, mines and factories per risk region. We hypothesise that the activities cited above are correlated with elevated toxicant runoff into the river. Alpha-version rank justification: in the vesdre catchment in Belgium, agricultural cover was significantly correlated with nutrient levels in the water. Results of this study were used to propose the risk ranks. To reduce uncertainty in the more detailed beta assessment land use versus water quality profiles need to be drawn with all available data on the topic (MacCartney 2010, Subaluski 2011, Gichana et al. 2014, Matano et al. 2015). A spatial analysis with QGIS needs to be done to calculate the percentage cover of different land uses per risk region. Measure: Land covered with agriculture and urban centres (% per RR) | **Zero**: Toxicant input is very low, unmeasurable. Almost no land covered with agriculture and urban centres.<br/><br/>**Low**: Toxicant input does not cause any adverse impact on human health. Limited area covered with agriculture and urban centres.<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Toxicant input causes tolerable adverse impact on human health. Large area covered with agriculture and urban centres.<br/><br/>**High**: Toxicant input causes unacceptable adverse impact on human health. Majority of land covered with agricultural and or rural/urban centres in the RR, resulting in increased toxicant levels in the water, threatening human health.
Mara Case study: Suspended sediments pollution affecting BHN (SED_BHN) | Increased sedimentation of the water in the risk regions has been associated with changes in land use and increased connectivity between erosion areas and the rivers (via roads, footpaths etc.). We hypothesise that land degradation is related to increased suspended sediment levels in the water. The measure selected to represent this variable is the "observed disturbance index" used by MacCartney (2010).  Measure: Observed disturbance value (MacCartney 2010) | **Zero**: Sediment input is not from anthropogenic activity. Less.<br/><br/>**Low**: Sediment input from anthropogenic activity is low and does not disturb ecosystem functioning . Potentially moderate.<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Sediment input from anthropogenic activity is moderate and causes disturbance. Moderate.<br/><br/>**High**: Sediment input from anthropogenic activity causes unacceptable disturbance. Severe.
Mara Case study: Abundance of pathogens which may affect human health (PATHOGENS_BHN) | Apart from the threat from abiotic toxicant in water that may affect the suitability of the water for BHN, the threat of microbial contamination must be considered as a potential threat to the Basic Human Needs endpoint. Although presence of these microbial pathogens in the river are expected and or known to be elevated in areas where livestock and wild animals are abundant, in this study high loads of these pathogens must be limited with efficient waste disposal and treatment (purify) with chorine for example and river management strategies to improve the assimilative capacity of the systems. The measure selected to represent microbial contamination potential for this low confidence assessment is the abundance of cattle and other large mammals that occur in or close to the river within each RR. Data of population, cattle and large mammal density needed (maybe data from ILRI or the National Bureau of Statistics). Measure: Variable described according to number of large mammals, people, cattle, and urban centres. | **Zero**: No pathogenic threat. No large mammals, cattle or humans.<br/><br/>**Low**: Pathogenic threat but not significant. Low population and cattle density.<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Threat of human contamination but within acceptable limits. High population and cattle density.<br/><br/>**High**: High pathogenic threat. Urban centre with no wastewater facility and/or large mammals in the water.
Mara Case study: Water quality dilution potential (DILUTION_MITIGATION) | The threat of water quality pollution to people (BHN endpoint) is a factor of the load of the toxicant and the volume (or dilution potential) of the river. Maintaining a suitable dilution potential to minimize the threat of toxicants is required to maintain the quality of water in the study area. Here the dilution potential for the rivers in each RR, per flow period (based on available/modelled hydrology) were considered. The measure of dilution potential includes the volume of water available in relation to river magnitude (based on river order/s) and changes (historical compared with current) in local and upstream land-use practices known to threaten the wellbeing of the water quality in the rivers. Available evidence suggests that flows ≥0.1 m3/s have been required in the upper parts of the Mara River basin (RR1) to maintain dissolved oxygen at a level of ≥5 mg/L, THg at levels <1 µg/L, pesticides <1 ppb and turbidity <100 NTU during base flows to maintain the wellbeing of the ecosystem and its users. In addition evidence from the middle reaches of the study area (RR2-RR7) demonstrate that flows ≥1 m3/s were required to maintain suitable water quality and turbidity levels during base flows and PCB levels at less than 0.5 ppb (low/moderate risk threshold). In the lower reaches of the study area low flows were recommended to be ≥0.4m3/s and ≥0.3m3/s for RR8/9 and RR10 respectively to accommodate downstream abstraction and maintain DO levels >5 mg/L and limit eutrophication of organic matter. In addition, during the high flow periods sufficient flows are required ≥0.5 - 0.75m3/s (uncertain of exact threshold) to maintain suitable oxygen levels in the river.  Available evidence was used to hypothesise rank thresholds for the assessment to evaluate the suitability of flows to dilute toxicant threats using discharge (m3/s) to represent ideal or zero rank conditions (>1.46 m3/s) , suitable or low rank state (1.01-1.45 m3/s), worst by acceptable threshold of potential concern conditions (0.51-1 m3/s) and unacceptable conditions (≤0.5 m3/s) state.  Measure: Discharge needed for dilution (m3/s) | **Zero**: Threat of toxicity from toxicants zero due to dilution. Discharge required to dilute waste is available.<br/><br/>**Low**: Threat of toxicity from toxicants is low. Slightly lower discharge than required to dilute waste.<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Threat of toxicity from toxicants is high. Lower discharge than required to dilute waste.<br/><br/>**High**: Threat of toxicity from toxicants is unacceptable. Insufficient and unacceptable discharge to dilute waste.
Mara Case study: Treatment of water before consumption/use (TREATMENT_DRINKING) | Water treatment before supply and use can reduce the risk of contamination that may affect human health (as a basic human need, for cooking, washing and drinking). The measure for this variable is the % of people in the risk region who benefit from treated water. Measure: Percentage of water for BHN that is treated (%) | **Zero**: Water is treated to highest standard and therefore does not represent a threat for BHN. Most water for BHN is treated.<br/><br/>**Low**: Local treatment systems, low threat to BHN. Large filters (local treatment plants) for water for BHN.<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Simple water treatment systems, medium threat to BHN. Small filters and chloride pills for drinking.<br/><br/>**High**: Unacceptable threat to human health due to insufficient treatment. The water for BHN is not treated.
Mara Case study: Volume of flows (QUANTITY) | In accordance with available information, the general effects of reduced flows (volume) in an ecosystem are known to negatively affect the wellbeing of various ecosystems components and the services these systems provide to people. In this Alpha EFA of the Mara River, the probable effect of reduced flows (volume) to ecosystem components in general have been evaluated. Base on available evidence and in the context of naturally flow variability and associated stress, and the endpoints selected for this study, we hypothesise that small reductions in flows or discharge, i.e. general reductions of 20% represents the zero-low risk rank threshold for ideal flows with minimal threat of changes to the wellbeing of the endpoints considered in this study. Thereafter, a moderate reduction of 35% of the flows represent the low-moderate threshold and a change of base flows related to a reduction in 50% was selected as the moderate-high rank threshold. In this case study discharge (in m3/s) was selected as the measure to represent the "Quantity" variable for reduced volumes which were used to query modelled %tile hydrology data that provides an estimate of the duration of different discharges for the scenario being evaluated (such as natural flows).  Here the duration of flows for each rank range (zero, low, moderate or high) were used to represent the probability of the state of the rank for the variable.  Measure: River discharge (m3/s) | **Zero**: Change in flows minimal . Range of flows (m3/s) according to discharge value <lt/>80% tile of natural base flows.<br/><br/>**Low**: Small change in flows. Value (m3/s) representing threshold for 81-90%tite of natural base flows.<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Moderate change in flows. Value (m3/s) representing threshold for 90-99.9%tite of natural base flows.<br/><br/>**High**: Significant/large change in flows. Portion (%tiles) of flows exceeding 99.9%tile value of natural flows.
Mara Case study: Volume needed for BHN according to pop. density in the RR. (DEMAND_BHN) | This variable refers to the quantity of water required for basic human needs (BHN) as a percentage of available flows.  Water for basic human needs is hypothesised to equal 50L per day, per person. The measure for this indicator is the % of the available base flows needed for BHN, based on population per risk region. This is calculated by multiplying the population density by the need per person (50L/d) and see how much this represents in relation to the dry season or wet season base flow. E.g. for dry season, the median in February for RR1 is 5.7m3/s, and 3% of this is needed for BHN. Measure: % volume of base flow needed for all people in the RR per day (%) | **Zero**: Very low water demand for BHN. Volume water needed is very low.<br/><br/>**Low**: Low water demand for BHN. Volume water needed is low.<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Moderate water demand for BHN. Volume water needed is moderate.<br/><br/>**High**: High water demand for BHN. Volume water needed is high.
Mara Case study: Percentage of wastewater which is treated before being discharged into the environment (TREATMENT_WASTEWATER) | Wastewater treatment before discharge into the environment can reduce the risk of contamination of the river ecosystem. The measure for this variable is the % of wastewater which is treated before being discharged in the environment. Add info on sources of wastewater (any direct wastewater discharge into the Mara River?).  Measure: % | **Zero**: Wastewater is treated. Very high percentage treated.<br/><br/>**Low**: Small amount treated. High percentage.<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Moderate amount treated. Moderate percentage.<br/><br/>**High**: Wastewater is not treated. Low percentage.
Mara Case study: Aquatic biological cues (AQUATIC_BIO_CUES) | There is extensive evidence that advocates the importance of ecological cue flows and the maintenance of various biological and ecological processes in rivers. Many aquatic animals and associated ecological processes have seasonal "triggers" or ecological cue flows to which important processes are linked. The majority of the ecological cues require specific flows which can generally be associated with suitably elevated freshet and flood flows particularly during summer. In this rapid EFA assessment we propose flows between base flows hypothesised to be comparable with the 50%tile discharge for the season considered and the 20%tile to represent freshet flows and flows above the 20%tile to represent small floods with major floods hypothesises to be associated with flows ≥5%tile. In this assessment the rank categories for the "Aquatic Biological Cue" variable have as a result been established around the duration of flows below the 50%tile representing unsuitable cue flows (high risk rank), flows between the 50-20%tile (moderate rank), flows between the 20-5%tile as acceptable and floods flows above ≥5%tile as ideal flows (zero rank).<br/><br/>Measure: Indicator of adequacy of volume, timing and duration of river water in relation to needs for biological processes of identified indicator species (m3/s) | **Zero**: All biological cue requirements are provided. Spring, summer freshets/floods differ <5% natural variability use discharge %tiles (m3/s) monthly data.<br/><br/>**Low**: Majority of biological cue requirements are provided. Spring, summer freshets/floods differ 6%-15% natural variability.<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Only critical  biological cue requirements are provided only. Spring, summer freshets/floods differ 16%-29% natural variability.<br/><br/>**High**: No biological cues are provided. Spring, summer freshets/floods differ >30% natural variability.
Mara Case study: Inundation (INUNDATION) | Flows required to maintain the wellbeing of the river banks and the associated riparian and floodplain ecosystems, are related to the different wetted perimeter requirements of river ecosystems. Summer flows are required to periodically overflow benches of the active channel and transport sediment to lateral bars, flush out of fine sediments and maintain channel form. Reduced flood flows (from >10% reduction) are generally considered affect the extent of inundation and associated sediment transport energy in rivers. Evidence demonstrates that riparian ecosystems may be significantly reduced by a reduction in peak flows >60%. In addition, reductions in flood inundation levels and resultant transport energy will limit flood deposition on the current banks, possibly shifting the grain size distributions of bank deposits to finer materials that are easily entrained by lower energy flows that inundate portions of the bank. Over time however these banks may be reworked and expected to become finer and more stable/cohesive. The morphology of the banks will adjust to the regulated flow regime by narrowing off the present channel and the riparian ecosystem responding to this change by encroaching the instream channel. Consider that channel width changes along alluvial sections are known to be more sensitive to changes in flows compared to bedrock sections. In this study flow related reductions associated with altered base, freshet and flood flows are hypothesised to result in modified river banks and affect the wellbeing of the riparian and floodplain ecosystems. In consideration of global trends of the effects of altered flows and river inundations, reductions of ≤10% of flood flows (represented by the 5%tile discharge of natural flows) were used to establish the zero-low risk rank threshold. Freshet flows (represented by the 20%tile) with reductions ≤20% were used to establish the low-moderate threshold, base flow (50%tile) changes of ≤20% were used to represent the moderate-high rank threshold. Here the duration of flows for each rank range (zero, low, moderate or high) were again used to represent the probability of the state of the rank for the variable. Measure: Flood extent and frequency to inundate banks and ensure plant seed dispersal (m3/s) | **Zero**: Floodplain is in an ideal condition due to frequent inundation for correct duration at the right time. Floodplain inundation flows comparable with natural (amount of floodplain inundation flows and total duration 95% similar).<br/><br/>**Low**: Floodplain is in an suitable condition due to numerous inundations for correct duration at the right time.  Floodplain inundation flows and total duration 75-95% similar.<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Floodplain is in an modified but acceptable condition due to reduced inundations and reduced durations of inundations.  Floodplain inundation flows and total duration 50-75% similar.<br/><br/>**High**: Floodplain is in an unacceptable condition due to reduced inundations and reduced durations of inundations.  Floodplain inundation flows and total duration <lt/>50% similar.
Mara Case study: Instream geomorphology (RIVER_GEOMORPH) | Global trends in geomorphological processes suggest that reduced flows and flow regulation result in the channel contracting and habitat alterations. With reduced/altered flows both width and depth of a river is expected to decrease as flood scouring and channel opening potential is reduced. Pool habitats in particular are considered to be vulnerable to flow reductions and bedrock dominated habitat sections are generally considered to be relatively tolerant to flow reductions. Although flow reductions are known to drive these geomorphological changes, occasional large floods will still have reset properties but the effects will generally occur more infrequently.  In a review of the effects of flow alterations associated with dam development results suggest that reduced flows result in geomorphic changes where the low flow channel will increase (by up to 32%) while the high flow channels may shrink (by as much as 50%). With reduced flows the river bed material is likely to become finer as the energy to transport bed sediment is reduced resulting in the deposition of smaller particles that are normally transported during present conditions. In this study the duration of flows related to different flow levels/phases were evaluated. Based on this evidence changes in common flood flows here as flows ≥10%tile have been proposed to evaluate small changes flows that would have a small effect on the channel geomorphology (zero risk rank category). Changes in flows between the 10-30%tile represent moderate changes while flow changes in the ≤50tile range represent the high risk category.  Measure: Floods shaping river bed (m3/s) | **Zero**: Substrate profiles and bank integrity comparable with natural. Sheer stress range discharge comparable with natural hydrology.<br/><br/>**Low**: Substrate profiles and bank integrity slightly different from natural. Sheer stress range discharge maintained for suitable duration..<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Substrate profiles and bank integrity largely different from natural. Sheer stress range discharge provided infrequently but suitable to "reset" bank sediment profiles..<br/><br/>**High**: Substrate profiles and bank integrity significantly different from natural. Sheer stress range discharge generally not provided, flows generally do not "reset" bank sediment profiles..
Mara Case study: Toxicant inputs which affect biota or key biotic indicators (TOX_ECO) | This variable considers the potential for the existence of activities that may release toxic water quality stressors that may threaten ecosystem wellbeing. Small and large scale agriculture, untreated domestic wastewater discharge, untreated wastewater from industrial factories and wastewater from gold mines are sources of toxicant input in the MRB. Toxicant input may in turn threaten aquatic life via accumulation into the food web and result in elevated levels in fish for example that may be consumed by piscivorous animals. The measure selected to represent this variable is the risk region percentage cover of agriculture, urban areas, mines and factories.  Measure: Land covered with agriculture and urban centres (% per RR) | **Zero**: Toxicant input is very low, unmeasurable. Almost no land covered with agriculture and urban centres.<br/><br/>**Low**: Toxicant input does not cause any adverse impact on biota. Limited area covered with agriculture and urban centres.<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Toxicant input causes tolerable adverse impact on biota. Large area covered with agriculture and urban centres.<br/><br/>**High**: Toxicant input causes unacceptable adverse impact on biota. Majority of land covered with agricultural and or rural/urban centres in the RR, resulting in increased toxicant levels in the water, threatening human health.
Mara Case study: Percentage cover of invasive species (INVASIVE_SPECIES) | The threat of competition, hybridisation and or predation (fauna only) of alien fauna and flora is known to be an important determinant of the wellbeing of ecosystems. Factors affecting the threat of aliens includes the potential of species to competition, hybridise and predate on indigenous spp. In this Alpha EFA assessment of the Mara River, the threat of alien species to selected endpoints includes the abundance and type (linked to knowledge of the threat of the aliens) of alien occurring in the RR. The measure for this variable is the % cover of invasive species within the bank vegetation. Measure: Percentage cover of invasive species (%) | **Zero**: Endemic species only. No invasive species.<br/><br/>**Low**: Small stress by invasive species. Existence of aliens but does not threatens wellbeing of indigenous spp..<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Medium stress by invasive species. Existence of aliens and threatens wellbeing of indigenous spp..<br/><br/>**High**: Endemic species highly stressed by invasive species. Aliens overtaking indigenous.
Mara Case study: Suspended sediments pollution affecting biota (SED_ECO) | Suspended sediment loads in the rivers are known to affect aquatic ecological processes, e.g. reduced growth rate, decreased size, doxygenation of water, trigger movement of fish, protection filter against predators (reduced visibility), reduced feeding efficiency (Bruton 1985). Land degradation including loss of vegetation cover and increase in road and footpaths mays lead to higher surface runoff and therefore lower water infiltration and reduced base flow. In addition, increased surface runoff on bare surfaces leads to increase in suspended sediment input in the river. The measure selected for this variable is an observed disturbance value from MacCartney (2010). Beta version: measure for this variable should be the extent of erosion features leading to sediment input into the water body, such as undercutting, rills and gullies affecting the riverbanks. Low flows important for sediment deposition. It was recommended that turbidity be less than 100 NTU in Site 1 (RR1) and 200 NTU in Site 2 (RR2) during base flows, although this objective must be reached by controlling upstream erosion rather than controlling in-stream flows. Hulsman (2015) noted that highest sediment inputs from the Sand arose from active river dynamics, grassland cover and sandy soil => RR4 and RR5. Measure: Observed disturbance value (MacCartney 2010) | **Zero**: Sediment input is not from anthropogenic activity. Less.<br/><br/>**Low**: Sediment input from anthropogenic activity is low and does not disturb ecosystem functioning. Potentially moderate.<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Sediment input from anthropogenic activity is moderate and causes disturbance. Moderate.<br/><br/>**High**: Sediment input from anthropogenic activity causes unacceptable disturbance. Severe.
Mara Case study: Biodiversity and richness of aquatic/riparian plant and animal species (IMPORTANCE_ECO) | This variable refers to ecological importance and ecological sensitivity (EIS) in the basin. Ecological Importance and Sensitivity (EIS) indicates the importance for maintenance of ecological diversity and system functioning on local and wider scales, ability to resist disturbance and their capability to recover from disturbance (LVBC & WWF-ESARPO, 2010). An EIS score (0-4, 0 being zero and 4 high importance and sensitivity) was calculated based on different criteria: rare and endangered species, populations of unique species, species/taxon richness, diversity of habitat types or features, migration route/breeding and feeding site, sensitivity to change in the natural hydrological regime, sensitivity to water quality changes, flood storage, energy dissipation and particulate element removal capacity.<br/><br/>26 benthic invertebrate families including 6 highly sensitive to flow encountered in the Mara River (Tamatamah 2012). 30 fish species 2 critically endangered, 1 endangered, and 1 near threatened (IUCN Red List 2010), 1 rare Tanzanian species (Tanzania national fish conservation rankings), 5 flow sensitive species (Tamatamah 2012). Measure: Number of sensitive invertebrate species (-) | **Zero**: No aquatic ecosystems. Biodiversity is very low and sensitivity to change is low (All spp. tolerant)..<br/><br/>**Low**: Low EI and ES. Biodiversity is low (e.g. <lt/>10 spp. fish) and sensitivity to change is low (most spp. tolerant)..<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Moderate EI and ES. Biodiversity is moderate (e.g. 10-20 spp. fish) and sensitivity to change is moderate (no spp. sensitive)..<br/><br/>**High**: High EI and ES. Biodiversity is high (e.g. >20 spp. fish) and sensitivity to change is high (some spp. very sensitive)..
Mara Case study: Dilution of salts (DILUTION_SALTS_CP) | The commercial use of water in the Mara Basin for agricultural crop production has been identified as an important activity in the Mara Basin and has been included as an endpoint in this study. Water quality threats specifically associated with elevated salinity have been identified as a threat to this economically important sector in the Mara Basin and has been incorporated into this study. Sufficient flows that provide suitable dilution potential have been used to mitigate the threat of elevated salinity in the region and abroad. Available evidence suggests that salinity concentrations in the rivers of the Mara Basin have varied considerably and appear to be affected by a wide range of determinants including a wide range of sources of salts such as anthropogenic activities and natural sources (mass death of wildebeest and or effects of hippopotamus for example).   In this case study, in context of observed salinity loads, unacceptable levels of salinity have been associated with extremely low flows and no-flow conditions in the basin where water is abstracted for commercial use (i.e. not in the nature reserves). Discharge (m3/s) has been selected as the hydrological variable used as a measure to represent the "Dilution of Salts for Crop Production" node. For this, the moderate to high risk thresholds for this variable has been  proposed to represent extreme low flows (99%tile) which will allow pools to be flushed of salts. Thereafter the low-moderate risk threshold which represents the threshold between suitable and worst but acceptable states has been proposed as the 95%tile flows. Finally with the precautionary principle the zero-low or ideal to suitable threshold has been selected as the 50%tile discharge level.  Measure: Discharge needed for dilution (m3/s) | **Zero**: Threat of salts to crop prod is zero due to dilution. Discharge required to dilute salts is available.<br/><br/>**Low**: Threat of salts to crop prod is low due to dilution. Slightly lower discharge than required to dilute salts.<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Threat of salts to crop prod is high due to limited dilution. Lower discharge than required to dilute salts.<br/><br/>**High**: Threat of salts to crop prod is very high due to no dilution. Insufficient and unacceptable discharge to dilute salts .
Mara Case study: Salts levels for crop growth (SALTS_CP) | Changes in salt concentrations in the river water may negatively affect crop growth and production as the water is used for irrigation. It is supposed that fertilizer, stormwater runoffs and urban wastewater discharge represent the main sources of ions (e.g. sodium, sulphate, chloride and magnesium) from manmade origin in the water. It is assumed that drought further increases the salt concentration. The measure chosen for this variable is % agricultural land cover. Measure: Agriculture land cover (%) | **Zero**: Salt levels suitable for crop growth, maximum yield can be reached. Small agricultural cover in the RR.<br/><br/>**Low**: Salt levels good for crop growth, good yields can be reached. Low agricultural cover in the RR.<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Salt levels negatively affecting  crop growth. Medium agricultural cover in the RR.<br/><br/>**High**: Salt levels unsuitable for crop growth, therefore crop failure. High agricultural cover in the RR.
Mara Case study: Need for food production by agriculture (CROP_DEMAND) | This variable represents the importance of irrigated crop production: large irrigation farms employ many local inhabitants and the food demand is present regionally and internationally. The measure of irrigated crop importance is the number of people employed for working in a large irrigation farm. The largest water use factor within the MRB is large scale irrigation (Hoffman 2007). The threshold 10000 was chosen, it represents about 5% of the population in RR1. Measure: Number of people working in irrigated farm (-) | **Zero**: Little need for local crop production. Number of people working in the irrigation farms and benefiting from the food is nil or very low.<br/><br/>**Low**: Moderate need for local crop production. Number of people working in the irrigation farms and benefiting from the food is low.<br/><br/>**Moderate**: High need for local crop production. Number of people working in the irrigation farms and benefiting from the food is high.<br/><br/>**High**: Very high need for local crop production. Number of people working in the irrigation farms and benefiting from the food is very high.
Mara Case study: Water quality for livestock (QUALITY_LIVESTOCK) | Water quality for livestock will be measured in terms of % agricultural cover as the fertilizers and pesticides used in agriculture may affect the health of the livestock. Better the health of the animal, the fast it grows and the healthier it is to use (e.g. milk or meat). Measure: Agriculture land cover (%) | **Zero**: Water quality high promotes good animal health. Agricultural cover upstream is very low.<br/><br/>**Low**: Water quality suitable promotes suitable animal health. Agricultural cover upstream is low.<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Water quality modified affects animal health moderately. Agricultural cover upstream is high but livestock life is not threatened.<br/><br/>**High**: Water quality poor, animal health poor. Agricultural cover and practices upstream threaten livestock life.
Mara Case study: Animals trampling on the river banks causing soil compaction and vegetation damage (ANIMALS_TRAMPLING) | The measure for this variable is the number of animals which trample on the river banks to access the water. We assume that in the parks, the wildebeest and hippos play a major role in bank engineering, and outside the parks, the cattle does. Measure: Density of cattle and large mammals which frequently access the water (nb/RR/year) | **Zero**: Banks not disturbed. No animals.<br/><br/>**Low**: Banks lightly disturbed by trampling. Small number of animals.<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Banks moderately disturbed by trampling. Moderate number of animals.<br/><br/>**High**: Banks highly disturbed by trampling. High number of animals.
Mara Case study: Importance of livestock for people (DEMAND_LIVESTOCK) | 1079270 livestock individuals in the basin (Hoffman estimates 2007 based on a combination of 1996, 2002 and 2006 data). Assumed 660320 people live in the basin, there is an average of 1.6 livestock ind. Per person in the basin (current situation). The measure for this variable will be the ratio nb of livestock availability/use, assuming the current use if 1.6 ind/person. We assume the threshold to unacceptable state is a ratio of availability/use of 0.9. Measure: Ratio availability/demand | **Zero**: Low need of livestock. Availability/use ratio is high.<br/><br/>**Low**: Moderate need of livestock. Number of people depending on livestock herding is moderate.<br/><br/>**Moderate**: High need of livestock. Number of people depending on livestock herding is high.<br/><br/>**High**: Very high need of livestock. Availability/use ratio is low.
Mara Case study: Riparian vegetation cover (VEG_BANK) | The measure chosen for this variable is an ecostatus value (A-D) based on vegetation health assessment . For the beta version, see results of VEGRAI ecostatus assessment. Measure: Vegetation health score summarizing zoning, species, etc. | **Zero**: Good vegetation health. High ecostatus value.<br/><br/>**Low**: Moderate vegetation health. Moderate ecostatus value.<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Bad vegetation health. Low ecostatus value.<br/><br/>**High**: Very bad vegetation health. Very low ecostatus value.
Mara Case study: Abundance of papyrus, grasses, trees (VEG_COVER_WETLAND) | A part of each wetland area is covered by vegetation. Wetland vegetation offers various services to humans such as nutrient retention, carbon sink, habitat for diversity, etc.. The measure for this variable is % area of the wetland covered by  vegetation. Measure: % wetland vegetation cover out of total wetland area | **Zero**: Maximum area possibly covered by vegetation in the floodplain. High % cover.<br/><br/>**Low**: Large area covered by wetland vegetation. Medium % cover.<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Small area covered by wetland vegetation. Low % cover.<br/><br/>**High**: No vegetation cover. Very low % cover.
Mara Case study: Sediment transport for the wetland (SED_WETLAND) | The flows required to maintain the transportation of sediments into the Mara Wetland for its wellbeing has been included in this study as an important component of the wellbeing of the river and the flow management requirements. In this study the measure selected to represent sediment transport has been based on regional and global averages on the relationships between reduced flows and disruptions in sediment mobility. Available evidence suggests that sediment movement linked to flood flows (measured as discharge in m3/s) and the duration of floods which have been identified in this study as the indicator of flow suitability for the Mara River. Historical assessments have established flood discharges which were used to represent the moderate-high threshold in this study. These floods are only required infrequently which has been incorporated into the ranking scheme. Using the flood threshold the moderate-high rank scheme boundary has been established. Thereafter moderate and large floods (considering historical hydrology) has been used to evaluate sediment transport for the Mara Wetland.  Measure: River discharge (m3/s) | **Zero**: Balanced sediment input/output of the wetland to maintain current extent. River discharge is stable and sediment input/output is relatively continuous.<br/><br/>**Low**: Slight unbalance in sediment input/output ratio. River discharge is modified but sediment input/output stays relatively balanced.<br/><br/>**Moderate**: High unbalance in sediment input/output ratio. Highly modified river discharge but in excessive impact on sediment balance.<br/><br/>**High**: Very high unbalance in sediment input/output ratio causing very high reduction of the wetland. Highly modified discharge, very low or very high river discharge, leading to excess input or output of sediments in the wetland.
Mara Case study: Wetland species assemblage (PLANT_COMMUNITY) | This variable represents the species composition in the wetland. Three main species are papyrus, typha and phragmites. The measure for this variable is the number of plant species (non-invasive) in the wetland.  Measure: % cover of permanently inundated area by major native wetland species Papyrus, Typha and Phragmites | **Zero**: Undisturbed species assemblage of Papyrus wetland. Portion of the permanently inundated area covered by the three main species is high.<br/><br/>**Low**: Low disturbance to species assemblage of Papyrus wetland. Portion of the permanently inundated area covered by the three main species is med.<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Medium disturbance to species assemblage of Papyrus wetland. Portion of the permanently inundated area covered by the three main species is low.<br/><br/>**High**: High disturbance to species assemblage of Papyrus wetland. Portion of the permanently inundated area covered by the three main species is very low.
Mara Case study: Importance of wetland for people (IMPORTANCE_WETLAND) | The measure for this variable is the percentage cover of wetland area in the risk region. Mara wetland (about 600km2) occurs in RR10, taking about 30% of the area. Other wetlands occur in RR7 and 8 in the conservation parks, and small riparian wetlands occur in RR1. Measure: % cover of wetland in the RR | **Zero**: Wetlands don’t occur. No Wetlands.<br/><br/>**Low**: Wetlands occur but are not important in the RR. Wetlands are uncommon in RR. Wetland types only palustrine ecosystems. .<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Wetlands are important in the RR. Wetlands are not dominant/common in RR. Wetland types only palustrine ecosystems. .<br/><br/>**High**: Wetlands are very important in the RR. Wetlands dominate/common in RR. Wetland types include floodplains and other palustrine ecosystems. .
Mara Case study: Tourists' perception of security (SAFETY_TOURISTS) | The measure for this indicator variable is the number of terrorist attacks perceived by tourists in the last six months. Measure: Number of terrorist attacks in the past six months | **Zero**: Highly secure. No terrorist attacks.<br/><br/>**Low**: Secure.<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Low security.<br/><br/>**High**: Very low security. At least one terrorist attack perceived in the last six months.
Mara Case study: Importance of ecotourism for people (DEMAND_ECOTOURISM) | 65 tourist accommodations within the MRB and daily water use per person staying at a luxury camp/ tourist accommodation: 380L/d (Hoffman 2007). There are currently 108 lodges and camps operating in and around the Masai Mara National Reserve with only 29% operating legally (GoK 2010). Measure: Number of tourist facilities | **Zero**: Very limited demand for ecotourism. Few tourist facilities.<br/><br/>**Low**: Low demand for ecotourism. Low number of tourist facilities.<br/><br/>**Moderate**: Significantly high demand for ecotourism. Significantly high number of tourist facilities.<br/><br/>**High**: Very high demand for ecotourism. Very high number of tourist facilities.
